---
layout: post
title: Security of Bitcoin and other PoW blockchains
---

It's been almost 9 months since my previous blog, but in Bitcoin time it must have felt like decades. While
the Earth was barely completing three third of its course around the Sun, thousands of Initial Coin Offerings
(ICOs) have come and also vanished (or busted) with so much money that rival the previous dot-com bubble.
Riding on Ethereum, an ICO typical issues digital tokens to be used as assets or utilities, and attracts
investors with unspoken promises of many X increases in token values. 

John Oliver described the current blockchain and cryptocurrency landscape quite eloquently:

> everything we don't understand about money combined with everything we don't understand about computers.

In this post I'll focus on explaining the current state of knowledge regarding security of these
cryptocurrencies. Security is often lauded as the key advantage of Bitcoin and Ethereum over the traditional
banking systems, i.e. cryptocurrencies are more secure. Well, if it were that cut and dry, I wouldn't be
writing this. My hope is that given what we know about the current (in)security, you (readers) may understand
more about the *computers* parts and become more ~~suspicious~~ ~~confused~~ amazed at how this whole thing
(i.e. *money*) even work, let alone having billions of market capitalization.  

I'll start with some background on security of PoW blockchains. I'll then discuss two important build-up work
[1], [2] leading up to the formalization in [3], and end with the quantitative model in [4]. There are other
important papers, but the selected are ones that I could make through, barely.   

## A little background
Blockchain is the buzz word of the day (another one is probably AI). There are two main classes of blockchain
systems: *permissioned* and *permissionless*. The former include Hyperledger, JP Morgan's Quorum and
Microsoft's Coco. The latter --- the original blockchain v1.0 --- are made hugely popular by Bitcoin and
Ethereum. One key difference between these two classes of systems is the consensus protocol. I have blogged
more than once about consensus protocols in traditional distributed systems, i.e. how difficult and subtle
they are. *Traditional* can be roughly understood as before Bitcoin. More specifically, traditional consensus
protocols assume that every node knows about the identity of another node in the system. Permissioned
blockchain makes adopt this assumption and therefore are able to use such protocols as PBFT without change. 

Permissionless blockchains make no assumption about node's identity. In such a purely decentralized setting,
overcoming Sybil attack is challenging, and for which traditional consensus protocols cannot be applied.
Proof of Work (PoW) emerges as the solution for achieving consensus. In PoW, nodes compete to solve
computationally hard puzzles, and whoever finds a solution get to append a new block to the chain. One typical
puzzle is to find $$n$$ such that

$$\text{SHA256}(X||n) < D$$

for a given value of $$X$$ (hash of previous block) and $$D$$ (pre-defined difficulty). In Bitcoin, $$D$$ is
  set such that the average time of solving the puzzle, **of the entire network as a whole**, is about $$10$$
  minutes. $$D$$ is adjusted dynamically based on the timestamps of a certain number of previous blocks. For
  example, if the previous $K$ blocks suggests fast block time ($$< 10$$ minutes), $$D$$ is decreased in order
  to bring the average block time back to $$10$$ minutes. Maintaining an appropriate value for block time is
  in fact very important for security, as will be clear later.   

A detailed comparisons of permissioned vs. permissionless blockchain merits a separate post. I'd shamelessly
refer readers to my recent survey paper [5].

### What is security?
Consensus protocols determine security of blockchain systems. In classic Byzantine settings, where malicious
(or Byzantine) nodes behave arbitrarily, security is the same as **safety** when the number of Byzantine nodes
is bounded. It broadly means that all honest nodes agree on the same value. In PBFT, for example,
safety property dictates that if an honest node locally commits to a tuple $$(seq,v)$$, then all other honest
nodes also do the same.  

In PoW, the adversary model is also Byzantine. However, the adversary's power cannot be expressed simply in
terms of number of nodes, because the network size is unknown. Instead, it is bounded by its commanding
*hashing power* relatively to the total network hashing power. For instance, a $$30\%$$-bounded adversary (or
simply $$30\%$$ adversary) can solve PoW puzzles $$30\%$$ of the time, while the remaining nodes together
solve $$70\%$$ of the time. Given this model, security is roughly understood as **block immutability**: if an
honest node puts a block $$(n, V)$$ on its blockchain, then all other honest nodes will do the same *with high
probability*. This probability is typically quantified with *confirmation length* parameter $$k$$, where
$$1-e^{\Omega(k)}$$ is considered reasonable security. In practice, this means the probability of tampering
with a block grows exponentially smaller as honest nodes wait for more confirmation blocks.   



<style>
table{
      border-collapse: collapse;
          border-spacing: 2px;
              border:2px solid #ff0000;
}

th{
      border:2px solid #000000;
}

td{
      border:1px solid #000000;
}
</style>
|&nbsp; Notation &nbsp;|&nbsp; Definition &nbsp;|
|:---:|:---|
|$$n$$|&nbsp; Number of nodes |
|$$\beta$$|&nbsp; Adversary bound |
|$$\alpha$$|&nbsp; Bound on honest nodes |
|$$k$$|&nbsp; Confirmation length |
|$$f$$ |&nbsp; Block interval: how fast a solution to PoW puzzle is found |
|$$\Delta$$ |&nbsp; Propagation delay |
|$$\gamma$$ |&nbsp; Rate at which honest node adopts blocks generated by the adversary |
|---|---|

The table above summarizes key notations for analysis. $$\beta$$ is the number of Byzantine nodes in
permissioned blockchains, and the relative hashing power in permissionless blockchain. It is easy to see why
Bitcoin as well as other PoW blockchain cannot be secure when $$\beta > 50\%$$. The specific attack here is
that the adversary builds a private chain $$C_a$$ which will be longer than the chain $$C_h$$ the honest nodes
are working on.  At any time, the adversary can broadcast $$C_a$$ and completely invalidates $$C_h$$. 

Security of traditional consensus protocols such as PBFT has been formally studied. Depending on network
condition, classic BFT protocols require different bounds on the adversary. In fully asynchronous network, no
consensus is possible (while also keeping liveness), due to the FLP result. The table below compares values of
$$\beta$$ necessary to achieve security. Recall that **partiall synchronous** means that there exists an
**unknown** boundi $$\Delta$$ on message delays; whereas **synchronous** means that that $$\Delta$$ is
**known**. 

  ||&nbsp; BFT (synchronous)  &nbsp;|&nbsp; BFT (partially synchronous) &nbsp;|&nbsp; PoW (synchronous & partially synchronous)&nbsp;|
  |:-----|:------:|:------:|:------:|
  |&nbsp; $$\beta$$ &nbsp;| $$\lfloor \frac{n}{2} \rfloor$$   |$$\lfloor \frac{n}{3} \rfloor$$  | $$50\%$$ |
  |---|---|---

---

## Effect of propagation time on Bitcoin security [1]
Decker et al. are the first to measure Bitcoin networks. Published in the P2P conference, just 5 years after the original
Bitcoin paper, the paper contains a nice description of Bitcoin at the network level: how blocks and other messages are
disseminated in the network. 

* *Propagation time* is defined as a time when a message is delivered to all nodes in the network. Without complete view
of the network, the paper estimates it by connecting a number of clients to the real Bitcoin network. The client
passively collects messages for a duration of $$10,000$$ blocks. Using the message log, propagation time for a block can
be estimated from the first time it was heard, until it was sent by all the client's neighbors. 

  > The measured propagation time is $$12.6s$$ in average. 

  Using the same methodology, Gervais et al. [4] report a similar delay of $$\approx 9s$$
  (the difference is due to faster network in 2016 vs. 2013, and the use of Bitcoin relay network in the later study). 

* Probability of forks due to concurrency is modeled as 
  
  $$ P_{fork} = 1 - (1 - f)^x $$
  
  where $$x$$ represents the duration during which a node stayed uninformed of a new block. $$x$$ is proportional, but
  not the same, as propagation delay, i.e. the higher the propagation delay, the higher is $$x$$. Decker et al.
  estimated $$f \approx 1/633.68$$ and $$x \approx 11.37$$, making $$P_{fork} \approx 1.78\%$$. Again, a similar result
  is confirmed later by Gervais et al. 
 
* An important interpretation of the fork model is that each time a block is found, an equivalent of $$x=11.37s$$ 
mining is wasted. As a consequence, the effective total hash power is only $$1 - 11.37/633.8 = 98.2$$. In other words,
  
  > The adversary bound decreases from $$50\%$$ to $$49.1\%$$. 

  We can devise a similar model for Ethereum where $$x$$ is smaller ($$<1s$$) and $$f$$ is higher ($$10-20s$$/block).
  Vitalk himself confirms [the bound is only $$46\%$$ for Ethereum.](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Proof-of-Stake-FAQ)

---

## References

[1] Decker et al. Information propagation in the Bitcoin network. P2P 2013 

[2] Eyal et al. Majority is not enough: bitcoin mining is vulnerable. FC 2014

[3] Garay et al. The bitcoin backbone protocol: analysis and applications. Arxiv 2017

[4] Gervais et al. On the security and performance of proof of work blockchains. CCS 2016

[5] Dinh et al. Untangling blockchain: A data processing view of blockchain systems. TKDE 2018
